July 3, 2023
Patrick Huang

If I know the state of every particle in your brain --- their position, velocity,
and how they interact with each other ---, do I have a full understanding of
your consciousness?

There are, broadly, three types of views on consciousness.

Dualism says that while the physical body follows physics, the consciousness or
soul transcends physics, and cannot be replicated.

Physicalism says that consciousness does follow physics --- your conscious
experience is a manifestation of some physical thing.

Functionalism takes physicalism further, and says that if you replicate the
consciousness, it is the same consciousness. It doesn't even need to be an exact
copy --- as long as the function is replicated (hence the name), like in a very
large computer, with trillions of pieces of lego, etc., it will still be the
same consciousness, and have the same experience.

The "Knowledge Argument" is a thought experiment relating to these views.
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Knowledge_argument

As Brian Greene describes in "Until the end of time", the argument is:
There is a scientist named Mary who is color blind. She studies physics
extensively, and at some point is able to model every process happening in the
world (which includes in her brain). Although she is color blind, she can
simulate through her models the exact processes happening if she were to see
color.

One day, she gains color vision for the first time (e.g. through surgery). Does
this new experience add anything to her knowledge?

As Brian Greene describes, she could be very surprised or amazed. This would
mean that experiencing color vision did add something. Even though she already
simulated everything that could happen, experiencing it was different.
Or she could "shrug". This would suggest that studying the simulation alone
would give her the same feeling as if she had actually seen color.

What are my thoughts on this?

First, what does "experience" seeing color mean?
Very abstractly, seeing color would fire some neurons in your brain, somehow
altering your brain state, creating a memory of the color.
This sequence of neurons firing, creating a persistent change, is the
experience.
Mary, being color blind, did not have this sequence happen in her brain.

What about seeing the simulation experience color?
This is, again, a very abstract description. When Mary studies the simulation,
it's like the simulation is encoded in a part of her brain. Yes, the simulation
probably exists on a computer, but when she thinks about the simulation, some
neurons are firing, which sort of encode the simulation into her brain.

These neurons studying the simulation are different from the color sensing
neurons in the previous paragraph.
We can think of Mary's brain as having two groups of neurons: One of them
responds to experiencing color. The other one is thinking about the simulation.

But the simulation is about herself experiencing color. So the group of neurons
thinking about the simulation encodes the hypothetical copy of her brain that is
experiencing color.
This happens while the group of neurons in the "real" Mary that respond to color
are not firing, as Mary is color blind.

If Mary can imagine a simulated brain experiencing color, does that give her the
actual experience?

From one perspective, yes. She has all the knowledge she needs. She knows
exactly what will happen if she were to see color. It's like if you use physics
to model a baseball: You know the conditions immediately after the batter hit it,
which allows you to model it's trajectory almost perfectly. Through your model,
you know where the baseball will be after 3 seconds.

But is there a difference between simply knowing where the baseball will be and
actually seeing it be there? In Mary, although she knows exactly what neurons
fire, that never actually happened to her. It's only after she is exposed to
color light that her "real" neurons fired for the first time. This suggests that
the experience did add something new that her detailed simulation could not
satisfy. Therefore, the simulation did not give her the real experience.

Although she knows exactly what will happen, it is difficult to physically
perform those actions in her "real" brain, for the simple reason that you can't
cut open your skull and manually choose which neurons to fire.

This suggests that the two perspectives are kind of like "theory" and "practice".
In theory, she has all the information she needs to replicate the experience of
seeing color.
But in practice, it is near impossible to artificially stimulate the trillions
of neurons, which is why the experience --- the pipeline of color hitting the
retina, setting off those particular neurons perfectly --- is so special.

These two perspectives can be made more clear with an analogy to daily life.
Let's say I am going to buy a Boeing 747. I did all the research about it: I
know exactly which buttons do what. I worked through the fluid physics, and know
how it will behave upon encountering any configuration of air. I watched videos
of pilots flying the plane.

Is that the same as actually buying the plane?

Again, the two perspectives are:
Yes: I know everything about it, so I don't need to obtain the plane; I can just
imagine myself flying it, an identical imagination to what would actually happen.
No: Even though I know what it would do, I don't actually feel the roller coaster
feeling by analyzing physics. This makes buying the plane special.
