August 24, 2023
Patrick Huang

RCI: Resistors, capacitors, and inductors.
These are three electrical components commonly introduced to beginners in
electrical physics.

Many are confused with the "essence" of these components; i.e. an intuition. In
this article, I will attempt to intuitively explain these components by
analyzing what their units are.

Consider resistors. They "resist" the electricity. But what does that mean? Are
there laws within the bounds of the resistor that limit electron immigration?

Consider Ohm's law: V = IR. Using this, we can reverse engineer the units of
resistance: V/A, or Volts/Amps. We usually abbreviate this as Ohms.

Consider Volts/Amps. When a unit is a division, we can interpret it as some
quantity of the top unit, when we have one of the bottom unit.

Consider what this means for the resistor. For each Amp of current, we get a
Volt. What does that mean? Well, voltage is analogous to force in the world of
electricity. So for each Amp of current --- a rate of flow of charges --- the
resistor gives us some force.

This is how the resistor "resists" electricity. Much like pushing water through
a narrow pipe, the harder we push, the more force the resistor pushes back with.
Actually, it's the faster we push, not the harder. Remember, we get one Volt for
each Amp of current.

The higher the resistance, the more force we get for each Amp. So, for a fixed
voltage, a smaller current will create the same backwards force in a higher
resistor. This is why higher resistors are associated with lower currents.

Resistors are like narrow water pipes; it is the velocity of water (current)
that decides how much force we get back.

Consider capacitors. The equation we use is q = CV. Again, we reverse engineer
the units as q/V, or Coulombs/Volts. We usually abbreviate this as Farads.

For our current discussion, it's easier to take the reciprocal of this, or V/q
--- Volts/Coulomb. Let's call this the "stiffness" for now.

Much like how the resistor pushes back when we run current, the capacitor pushes
back when we simply pass some charge through it.

This is why capacitors "charge up" when connected to a fixed supply. As much
charge flows through as needed to create the backwards force equal to the
supply.

The more Volts we get for each Coulomb, the less charge we need to create the
same force. Using our current terminology, the capacitor is stiffer.

As for the reciprocal, it means more stiffness is less capacitance. So while
higher resistance means more backwards force, higher capacitance means less
backwards force, under the same conditions.

Capacitors are like rubber diaphrams in pipes; it is the quantity of water
(charge) that decides how much force we get back.

Consider inductors. We model them with V = L(dI/dt). We reverse engineer the
units as V/(A/s), or Volts/(Amps/second). We usually abbreviate this as "Henry".

Like how both resistors and capacitors provide a backwards force under certain
circumstances, inductors do likewise when we do "Amps/second". What does that
mean?

Amps/second is a strange unit. Our first instinct may be to interpret it as
current, but we are mistaking it for Coulombs/second. Rather, Amps/second is
how quickly the current is changing.

So inductors provide a backwards force when we attempt to change the current
through it. Higher inductance means more backwards force for the same attempt to
change the current.

Inductors are like heavy water wheels driven by the flow through a pipe; it is
how hard we try to change the rate of flow (the rate of change of current) that
decides how much force we get back.
