September 4, 2023
Patrick Huang

Relative Functionalism is my view on the meaning of the universe. It is an
extension of functionalism, originally developed for explaining consciousness,
or "philosophy of mind".

Consider functionalism. I explain philosophy of mind in more detail in
`mary.txt`.
In short, functionalism states that consciousness is a physical process. In
addition, you could model it with some function. For example, this neuron
influences those, and so on.
You can replicate the exact conscious experience by replicating the function. No
matter what your replication is --- legos, mechanical gears, or a computer ---
as long as it performs the same function, it is the same conscious experience.

Wikipedia lists a few counterarguments, most of which are quite dubious to me. I
will counter a few of them here, and in the process, develop my idea of relative
functionalism.

The china brain argument: Consider if every person in China acts like a neuron,
communicating, for example, with walkie talkies (Wikipedia). Does this system
have a conscious experience?
Functionalism says yes. It performs the same functions as a "real" conscious
experience.
Opposers argue that this is "patently absurd" (Ned Block). It is quite
interesting to note that the opposer's argument wholly rests on a subjective
declaration of "patently absurd".

Imagine you are on the moon, chatting through a messaging application. Your
partner could either be a "real" mind (i.e. a human) or the china brain system.
If the china brain system does work as a mind, then you would not be able to
differentiate between the two.

This is the turing test: If you cannot tell a difference, you have no basis to
say that the two things are different.

On the other hand, if you were on Earth observing the two things, you would be
able to tell a difference. One is a human, while the other is a country of
people talking in walkie talkies.

Notice how we defined how we are observing the two things. This is where the
relative in relative functionalism comes from. In order to say that two things
are or are not functionally identical, you must define in what way; from what
point of view.

Another example is the chinese room argument. Imagine a person "speaks" chinese
only by following a set of syntactic rules. Opposers argue that although the
spoken chinese is gramatically and semantically correct, the person does not
"understand" chinese, whatever that means.

Again, this is a subjective declaration. You could have multiple points of view.
If you interact through a chat application, you have no way of telling a
difference. So you have no basis to say that the person cannot understand
chinese.

If you interact in person, you might be able to tell a difference, depending on
how fluent the other is. If they are looking up words and rules in a dictionary,
you could tell that they are not fluent. But if they memorized all the rules and
execute them perfectly, again, you have no basis to say that they do not
understand chinese.

It doesn't matter if they "really understand" it in their heart, whatever that
means. You can't find evidence of the difference; you have no argument.

This is similar to duck typing in programming. "If it looks like a duck, swims
like a duck, and quacks like a duck, then it probably is a duck." (Wikipedia).

In short, it doesn't matter what the actual data type is. If it performs the
appropriate functions (i.e. methods), then good; you can use it as if it were
a "real" (i.e. what you assume it to be) thing.
