March 5, 2023
Patrick Huang

What is teaching? The act of educating others.
What is education? The acquirement of new skills.
What skills are important?
And how should we acquire them?

To define what is "important", we need an end goal. Then, important would be what
ever helps us achieve the goal best. Perhaps one goal would be to help future and
present humans. By making every action constructive --- helpful to humanity ---,
humanity advances quickly. Of course, many would argue about the meaning of life
and humanity; for now, let us assume that it has something to do with making
progress.

Empathy is useful. Why? Humans are governed by emotions --- it is a evolutionary
thing. Empathy --- the ability to understand others' emotions --- speeds up
progress, as no energy is wasted on emotional conflicts.

On the other hand, science is also important. Science is a somewhat objective
system that is resilient to disagreements. In science, disagreements extend the
understanding. To progress in science requires many scientific skills --- how to
do calculus, solve problems, etc. How is this best learned?

One short interjection: These two skills --- empathy and science --- roughly map
to normative and positive things. Normative skills are based on opinion --- they
guide us when there isn't an obvious objective path available. Positive skills
are like the scientific method. They allow progress resilient to disagreements.

Regarding positive skills, some may argue that memorization is the way. Science
is objective, and so should your skills. However, this regurgitation of
information is not a useful skill after a point for humans. My SSD can
regurgitate at 500MB/s; there is no need for humans to attempt to compete. Humans
need to learn skills differently.

For a human to truly know a skill, it must be connected to other information in
their brain. This allows it to be useful: Brute force memorizing is useless, as
stated above. Connecting it with other information allows each human to
contribute something unique; every human has a different mind. Some may call this
intuition, or being able to do something in your sleep. It is an internalization
of a skill that fits well with other knowledge.

Some may wrongly assume that knowing the why or reason behind a fact creates this
understanding; that knowing why a math theorem is true creates a deep relation to
other knowledge. Knowing the why is just another memorization, which is, again,
useless for humans. However, I would argue that knowing the reason does play a
key role in truly understanding, but learning it in a different way.

Instead of being fed the proofs of math theorems, why not have the students try
to explain it to themselves on their own? When one explains something to
themselves, they often truly learn it. Creating that explanation relates it to
other knowledge they already have --- they are using that knowledge to explain
it. This creates a deep understanding that cannot be replicated by any professor
lecturing; a teacher cannot understand all the complexities inside their
student's mind.

As always, consistent and good practice refines skills. But be careful about what
you are practicing. Are you practicing regurgitating calculus rules to solve
problems, or are you practicing the ability to understand those rules? A good
way to do the latter is to ask yourself, "Why is this true?" at every step. You
will then create an explanation for yourself, internalizing a pattern that you
truly understand.

This creates a paradoxical job for the teacher: They cannot teach everything, as
that would result in no internal understanding for the students. So what does the
teacher do?

The teacher must do just enough for the students to learn; sometimes, students
cannot reinvent a whole branch of science for themselves. The teacher must
provide sufficient guidance, to and only to a point where students can do the
rest on their own. It is ultimately the students' responsibility to learn
themselves.

Of course, this is an idealized world where all students are willing to go
through this process. In the real world, mots are content or unaware of their
incomplete knowledge. There are a few possible reasons why: Social reinforcement
or poor teaching in the early stages. Now, as usual, we can have our idealized
utopia dream destroyed by the imperfect reality.
