November 30, 2022
Patrick Huang

Four score and twelve days ago, I finished an assignment for my language arts
class. It was to write a letter to one's future self, the person one will become
after the year of learning. This started a series of thought experiments for
me.

Consider the present person --- we shall hereafter refer to them as Alice. They
have written a letter, but do they get a response? In order to receive the
response, the information contained in the letter must be transferred through
some medium to the receiver --- the future person, called Bob --- and transferred
back to Alice. This is simple in real life cases. By using a mailing service,
one can exchange information across space. But in this case, Alice and Bob are
the same person, at different points in time (and possibly space as well). Is
there a way to transfer the information forward and backward through time?

First, let us return to the information-across-space thought --- that is, the
traditional form of mailing. What if we don't need to send the mail to receive
information? That is, we don't actually need to communicate with the receiver to
know what they will reply. This is pretty common, for example with a computer.
If my message is 1+1, it is almost certain that the computer will reply 2. By
doing this, we have somehow communicated without communicating; we have obtained
the reply without receiving the reply. How was this possible? We were able to
predict what was going to happen.

Predict. An interesting word. Commonly, it is thought of as being able to tell
the future. But it doesn't have to be. In the previous example, we could predict
the response without any reference to time. Predicting simply means obtaining
more information from what you have. In a sense, this means that there is no
such thing as research, discoveries, or breakthroughs. All the information is
already present, and only waiting for something to conclude it from the existing
building blocks. But this is off track for our current topic --- we shall return
to it another day.

In theory, if one has all the laws of the universe and the current state, it
is possible to predict everything that occurs, in both the future and the past,
in both up and down, east and west, north and south. (Currently, our
understanding of quantum fluctuations messes this up because it adds a dash of
randomness --- there are no more all-powerful laws.) But, if this were true,
Alice would be able to know what Bob is like --- all the particles that make up
his cells. If all human consciousness is governed by just the arrangement of
particles --- that is, still following the laws of the universe, thereby removing
the possibility of a supernatural spirit ---, then, it is possible to predict
Bob's thought process given Alice's --- it is possible to predict your future
self given you.

This is how you reply to your letter through time. You don't need to send it to
your future self. You already know how your future self acts, thinks, breathes,
everything. Just like with the computer, you already know the reply that will
be made.

One more implication: If everything is predictable, then there is no free will,
and the future and past of everything is already decided. In fact, we may not
even be moving steadily through time. Consider your thought process right now.
How can you prove to yourself that you have been living your past life
sequentially? You may remember your experiences in order, and have no idea what
will happen in the next second. But why do you remember your experiences?

Going back to an aforementioned point, your consciousness is made up of an
arrangement of particles. Perhaps, you remember your experiences, because, by the
laws of the universe, outside things --- your experiences --- affect you --- for
example with light hitting your retina, sending an electrical signal down your
nerves ---, and through millions of years of evolution, it just so happens that
the beings that are able to use these interactions survive the best, for example
being able to avoid a predator. This is how you remember. The environment affects
you, and you are able to encode these affections in a way that allows you to use
them later.

Back to our thought. Right now, you only remember what happened previously. One
minute ago, you only remembered what happened before one minute ago. Five hours
from now, you will only remember what happens before five hours from now. Imagine
that you are suddenly transported to a different time. At that point, you only
know what has happened before, and you will have no idea the time jump happened,
because either the laws of the universe or our evolution don't get affected from
this. Similar to scrubbing a video, you can jump around all you want, and the
timestamp you are on will have the same things, with the same people, all having
experiences before that point in time.

There are three problems that need to be addressed. First, this assumes time or
the laws of the universe have some inherent direction in them. Why is it that
affections change your internal state in one direction of time --- allowing you
to encode and remember the past --- but does not in the other direction? Think
about it. What will happen five minutes from now is only five minutes away. You
probably have no problem remembering five minutes ago. Why is five minutes the
other direction impossible to recall for you? Second, this assumes that humans
follow the laws of the universe, and they have complicated actions because only
because of their large number of actors in the universe (atoms). Similar to a
neural network, by following a set of rules, the sheer volume of things that are
following those rules can allow for interesting effects. Third, this assumes that
consciousness is nothing. You can jump around in time, switching to a different
consciousness, made up of the arrangement of your particles at that time. These
shall be addressed in future thoughts.

If this is true, you could be moving or jumping around in time right now. You
could be traveling backwards, making jumps billions of years rapidly, or perhaps
simply following the steady forward flow. But, because at each destination, you
only remember what happened previously, again either due to the laws of nature or
your evolution, you feel like it is one continuous stream of movement. This is
confusing to think of; instead, think of it as each atom of you is independently
moving or jumping through time, and every time they get to a timestamp, they
always appear at the same position. Just like the pixels of a video, the computer
screen may be displaying many images as you scrub through, but every time you
look at a timestamp, it is the same thing.

This is somewhat similar to minutephysics's video on the Grandfather Paradox,
which comes to the conclusion that everything is a quantum superposition. In this
case, the universe is a superposition of all particles through space and time.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XayNKY944lY

This is both an exciting and terrifying possibility. It would remove all the
meaning in life and free will. Should we worry? I think not, because billions of
people are able to live a happy life, believing that they are moving steadily
through time and have a free will. The method works, so we can keep using it.
